Handling assign, apply, and lambdas (#301)
UBC-DSCI/introduction-to-datascience-python: source/wrangling.md

Reviewer: Overall I think this is less complicated now and easier to understand! Should we somehow include regular column assignment as a learning objective too?

Author: Yes -- will handle that in https://github.com/UBC-DSCI/introduction-to-datascience/issues/504

Author: (that issue is on the R book but it's for both Py and R)

> above a numeric threshold of a column).

Reviewer: Minor: On line 785 above we refer to the object dtype as "object" with quotation marks, but further than we use backticks: `object` so maybe change the above to that too for consistency?

Reviewer: I would also change:

> It makes sense for `region`, `category`, and `language` to be stored as an
`object` type.

to

> It makes sense for `region`, `category`, and `language` to be stored as an
`object` type since they hold categorical values.

Author: will fix both

> That won't be possible if the variable is stored as a `object`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That won't be possible if the variable is stored as an `object`.
```

> Fortunately, the `pandas.to_numeric` function provides a natural way to fix problems

Reviewer: In section 3.10, we show them `astype`, should we use that here also for consistency? Then we could also convert both columns together in a single line instead of two below.

Author: agree and done

+++

## Apply functions across multiple columns

Computing summary statistics is not the only situation in which we need
to apply a function across columns in a data frame. There are two other
common wrangling tasks that require the application of a function across columns.
The first is when we want to apply a transformation, such as a conversion of measurement units, to multiple columns.
We illustrate such a data transformation in {numref}`fig:mutate-across`; note that it does not
change the shape of the data frame.

```{figure} img/wrangling/summarize.005.jpeg
:name: fig:mutate-across
:figclass: figure

A transformation applied across many columns. The darker, top row of each table represents the column headers.
```

For example, imagine that we wanted to convert all the numeric columns
in the `region_lang` data frame from `int64` type to `int32` type

> using the `.as_type` function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
using the `.astype` function.
```

```{index} pandas.DataFrame; apply, pandas.DataFrame; loc[]
```

> We can simply call the `.as_type` function to apply it across the desired range of columns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can simply call the `.astype` function to apply it across the desired range of columns.
```

we can pass a `lambda` function as an argument to `apply` without any parentheses.
```
We can simply call the `.as_type` function to apply it across the desired range of columns.

Returning to our example, let's use `apply` to convert the columns `"mother_tongue":"lang_known"`
to `int32`. To accomplish this we create a `lambda` function that takes one argument---a single column
of the data frame, which we will name `col`---and apply the `astype` method to it.
Then the `apply` method will use that `lambda` function on every column we specify via `loc[]`.
```{code-cell} ipython3
region_lang_nums = region_lang.loc[:, "mother_tongue":"lang_known"].apply(lambda col: col.astype("int32"))
region_lang_nums = region_lang.loc[:, "mother_tongue":"lang_known"].astype("int32")
region_lang_nums.info()
```
You can now see that the columns from `mother_tongue` to `lang_known` are type `int32`.
You can also see that `apply` returns a data frame with the same number of columns and rows
as the input data frame. The only thing `apply` does is use the `lambda` function argument
on each of the specified columns.

> ### Apply a function row-wise with `apply`

Reviewer: I think this section is much clearer now, nice!

> region_lang_nums.max(axis=1)

Reviewer: An alternative here is to say `axis='columns'` and then emphasize above that when we are applying a function row-wise it will go across all the *columns* which links to the name of this option (so that students don't think it should be called "rows" since it is "row-wise"). I'll let you pick what you think is clearer, just a possible alternative, I generally like naming the axes with a string instead of a number personally since I forget which is axis 0 and 1 constantly... (and I think there is some pandas function where they are confusingly inverted). There is a couple of occurences of this further down in case you decide to change it

Author: I'll open this as a low-priority issue -- I'd need to think more carefully about whether/how to propagate this among chapters, and I don't think it's necessary for 1st edition.

> While `pandas` provides many methods (like `max`, `as_type`, etc.) that can be applied to a data frame,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While `pandas` provides many methods (like `max`, `astype`, etc.) that can be applied to a data frame,
```

```{index} pandas.DataFrame; []
```

When we compute summary statistics with `agg` or apply functions using `apply`,

> those give us new data frames. But what if we want to append that information

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we compute summary statistics or apply functions,
a new data frame or series is created. But what if we want to append that information
```

to an existing data frame? For example, say we wanted to compute the
maximum value in each row of the `region_lang_nums` data frame using `apply`,
and to append that as an additional column of the `region_lang` data frame.
In this case, we have two options: we can either  create a new column within the `region_lang` data
frame itself, or create an entirely new data frame
with the `assign` method. The first option we have seen already in earlier chapters, and is
the more commonly used pattern in practice:
```{code-cell} ipython3
:tags: ["output_scroll"]
region_lang["maximum"] = region_lang_nums.apply(max, axis=1)
region_lang

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
to an existing data frame? For example, say we wanted to compute the
maximum value in each row of the `region_lang_nums` data frame,
and to append that as an additional column of the `region_lang` data frame.
In this case, we have two options: we can either  create a new column within the `region_lang` data
frame itself, or create an entirely new data frame
with the `assign` method. The first option we have seen already in earlier chapters, and is
the more commonly used pattern in practice:
```{code-cell} ipython3
:tags: ["output_scroll"]
region_lang["maximum"] = region_lang_nums.max(axis=1)
region_lang
```
````

No reason to use `apply`  here either

You can see above that the `region_lang` data frame now has an additional column named `maximum`.
The `maximum` column contains
the maximum value between `mother_tongue`,
`most_at_home`, `most_at_work` and `lang_known` for each language
and region, just as we specified! 

> To instead create an entirely new data frame with the `assign` method, we specify one argument for each column we want to create.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To instead create an entirely new data frame, we can use the `assign` method and specify one argument for each column we want to create.
```

In this case we want to create one new column named `maximum`, so the argument

> to `assign` begins with `maximum = `.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to `assign` begins with `maximum= `.
```

>   maximum = region_lang_nums.apply(max, axis=1)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  maximum=region_lang_nums.max(axis=1)
```

)
```
This data frame looks just like the previous one, except that it is a copy of `region_lang`, not `region_lang` itself; making further

> changes to this data frame will not impact the original `region_lang` data frame.

Reviewer: To make this even more explicit, should we assign it to a new variable name above?

Author: fine as-is

```
The data frame above shows that the populations of the five cities in 2016 were
5928040 (Toronto), 4098927 (Montréal),  2463431 (Vancouver), 1392609 (Calgary), and 1321426 (Edmonton).

> We will first add this information to a new data frame in a new column named `city_pops` by using `assign`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we will add this information to a new data frame column called `city_pops`.
Once again, we will illustrate how to do this using both regular column assignment
and the  `assign` method, starting with the latter.
```

Just being a bit more explicit in what's happening next

Once again we specify the new column name (`city_pops`) as the argument, followed by the equal symbol `=`,
and finally the data in the column.
Note that the order of the rows in the `english_lang` data frame is Montréal, Toronto, Calgary, Edmonton, Vancouver.
So we will create a column called `city_pops` where we list the populations of those cities in that
order, and add it to our data frame.
And remember that by default, like other `pandas` functions, `assign` does not
modify the original data frame directly, so the `english_lang` data frame is unchanged!
```{code-cell} ipython3
:tags: ["output_scroll"]
english_lang.assign(
  city_pops=[4098927, 5928040, 1392609, 1321426, 2463431]
)
```

> ```{note}

Reviewer: It's good that we have this note, I was just thinking about it when reading through the passage above. Can we change:

> We do it here to demonstrate another usage of `assign` that does not involve `apply`.

to

> We do it here to demonstrate another usage of `assign` and regular column assignment.

I also think we can move it after do the regular column assignment and point out that it is an issue with both assign and regular column assignment. Then the note will also act as a break before the proportion section.

Author: agree done

the `merge` function, which lets you combine two data frames. We will show you an
example using `merge` at the end of the chapter!
```

> Once again we can also instead directly modify the `english_lang` data frame using column assignment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead of using the `assign` method we can directly modify the `english_lang` data frame using regular column assignment.
This would be a more natural choice in this particular case,
since the syntax is more convenient for simple column modifications and additions.
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
:tags: [remove-cell]
english_lang["city_pops"] = [4098927, 5928040, 1392609, 1321426, 2463431]
```
```python
english_lang["city_pops"] = [4098927, 5928040, 1392609, 1321426, 2463431]
english_lang
```
```text
/tmp/ipykernel_12/2654974267.py:1: SettingWithCopyWarning:
A value is trying to be set on a copy of a slice from a DataFrame.
Try using .loc[row_indexer,col_indexer] = value instead

See the caveats in the documentation: https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/user_guide/indexing.html#returning-a-view-versus-a-copy
  english_lang["city_pops"] = [4098927, 5928040, 1392609, 1321426, 2463431]
```
```{code-cell} ipython3
:tags: [remove-input]
english_lang
```
Wait a moment...what is that warning message? It seems to suggest that something went wrong, but
if we inspect the `english_lang` data frame above, it looks like the city populations were added 
just fine! As it turns out, this is caused by the earlier filtering we did from `region_lang` to
produce the original `english_lang`. The details are a little bit technical, but

> `pandas` sometimes does not like it when you subset a data frame using `[]` or `loc[]` followed by

Reviewer: Great to explain this!

column assignment. For the purposes of your own data analysis, if you ever see a `SettingWithCopyWarning`, just make sure
to double check that the result of your column assignment looks the way you expect it to before proceeding.
For the rest of the book, we will silence that warning to help with readability.
```{code-cell} ipython3
:tags: [remove-cell]
# suppress for the rest of this chapter
pd.options.mode.chained_assignment = None
```

Now we have a new column with the population for each city. Finally, we calculate the
proportion of people who speak English the most at home by taking the ratio of the columns
`most_at_home` and `city_pops`. Let's modify the `most_at_home` column directly; in this case
we can just assign directly to the column.
This is precisely what we did in {numref}`str-split`,
when we first read in the `"region_lang_top5_cities_messy.csv"` data and we needed to convert a few
of the variables to numeric types.
Note that it is again possible to instead use the `assign` function to produce a new data frame when modifying an existing column,

> although this is not commonly done.

Reviewer: I think it is a bit odd that we end up `most_at_home` as a rate and `most_at_work` as an absolute number, but with column names that imply that they are the same measure in different context. I would either create a new column with `rate` appended or convert both to rates.

Author: agree fixed (and bonus assignment to loc)

```{code-cell} ipython3
:tags: ["output_scroll"]
english_lang["most_at_home"] = english_lang["most_at_home"]/english_lang["city_pops"]
english_lang
```

+++

## Using `merge` to combine data frames

Let's return to the situation right before we added the city populations
of Toronto, Montréal, Vancouver, Calgary, and Edmonton to the `english_lang` data frame. Before adding the new column, we had filtered

> our `region_lang` to create the `english_lang` data frame containing only English speakers in the five cities

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`region_lang` to create the `english_lang` data frame containing only English speakers in the five cities
```
